Never before in human history
have we had two powers
of the size, the scale, and reach
of United States and China confronting
each other in the way that they are
today. China has become a tiger. And so,
we have to learn to live with a much
stronger power. Kishore Mahbubani,
academic, diplomat, someone who has seen
the rise of China from his native
Singapore. You said [music] that
this what's happening now is like the
Cold War, only America now is behaving
[music] as the Soviet Union was. It's a
very unflattering comparison. The goal
of my writings is not to say that China
should win or United States should win.
It's to say that China and US should
step back
and reflect whether it is in their
larger, long-term interest to engage in
such a zero-sum contest.
From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Michelle Hussain show.
By now, you've probably seen a fair
amount of news emerging from Beijing,
[music]
where President Trump has been meeting
China's Xi Jinping.
One-to-one, face-to-face meetings of
this kind don't come around often. But,
there is a much bigger story to tell
than that of these two men. Or any two
leaders of these countries, actually.
The real story is an epic tale that has
been unfolding for about 30 years. And
it's about supremacy, the battle to be
the world's number one power. That's
what we wanted to dive into this
weekend, the story beyond the handshake,
the read out, the truth social posts.
And we wanted to do it from the
perspective of someone who is neither
American nor Chinese, but has witnessed
the rise of China from his own country,
which is tiny in comparison, Singapore.
Kishore Mahbubani was for three decades
a Singaporean diplomat, rising to become
its ambassador at the United Nations.
He's from Singapore's minority Indian
community, and although I've known him
for years, I only recently understood
the circumstances, the tough
circumstances, in which he grew up in
the 1950s and 60s. He's written many
books. His most recent is called Living
the Asian Century, and it's also his
most personal. As ever, for the context
beyond the conversation, for more on the
people, the places we talk about, have a
look at bloomberg.com/michelle.
That is where you'll find the written
version of this with my reflections and
pictures, which add to the story. But,
here's Kishore Mahbubani in his own
words, talking first about why the US
and China matters so much right now.
It is by far
>> [laughter]
>> the most important contest of our time.
And I think what most people don't
realize
is that never before in human history
have we had two powers
of the size, the scale, and reach
of United States and China confronting
each other in the way that they are
today.
Cuz the United States is a remarkably
powerful country, much more powerful
than any other great power has been in
human history.
And [snorts] of course, uh when the when
the Soviet Union collapsed, the United
States was left alone as the sole
superpower in the world and few expected
China to come up so quickly. But now
China has clearly
achieved near parity
with the United States in in the scope
and scale of its power, too. And
therefore, you notice when President
Trump launched his uh
uh tariff wars on the all the countries
in the world, only one country stood up
to United States and that was China. In
this context then, do you see it as
bigger than the economics of it? The
desire on the part of the United States
to maintain its position as the world's
biggest economy. Are you talking about
power as something broader than that? A
quest to become the world's only
superpower.
You know, geopolitics has been around
for about 2,000 years or so.
And so, there are certain habits of
behavior
that all great powers share in common.
And the number one power of the time
always wants to preserve its number one
position
and not give it up gracefully and say,
"Okay, my turn is up.
Why don't you take over?" It's not like
in the world of business where IBM will
give way to another company, for
example.
But in geopolitics is a zero-sum game,
sadly.
And so, even though Washington, D.C.
today
is a very badly divided capital
politically,
but when it comes to China, there's a
near universal consensus
that it is in the interest of the United
States to stop the rise of China.
And and that's why the actions against
China
remain consistent whether or not you
have President Trump or President Joe
Biden, it makes no difference.
It's not about personalities,
it's about the logic of geopolitics. And
would you say that that is a foolish
desire to stop the rise of China because
this is the way the world is going that
China
is on a path to become the dominant
economic power and the demography is on
its side?
Well, no, I I would say
it's not wise policy of the United
States
to stop the rise of China because China
can no longer be stopped.
And the only way to stop China
is to ask the Chinese government to stop
improving the livelihood of his own
people.
Right?
If you want China to that's only that's
the only way that China will stop
growing. But China still has a long way
to go. It's per capita income is way
behind that
of the United States. It has a long way
to go.
So clearly the Chinese people want to
improve their lives and the Chinese
economy will keep growing. Of course
there'll be ups and downs like in any
other economy. But equally importantly
and this is the key point, we live in
our today in a small interdependent
fragile planet Earth.
And our over our overall priority
as humanity should be to try and
preserve planet Earth before we lose it
to climate change and other forces. So
there [snorts] is therefore a larger
imperative need
for the US and China to collaborate to
deal with many common challenges in the
world rather than to engage in a
zero-sum game with each other. And by
the way, you know,
I've used a different analogy in a
former book of mine, The Great
Convergence, saying that the world has
shrunk.
The 193 countries are no longer 193
separate boats.
The 193 countries are 193 separate
cabins on the same boat.
You know, and if you're cabin on the
same boat,
there's no point protecting your cabin
if the boat is sinking.
So, therefore, there's a common interest
for US and China
to come together and take care of the
planet Earth because that's far more
important than whatever you gain to make
in this geopolitical game of
one-upmanship. Take me back to 1993 and
a moment between the two countries that
you saw for yourself as a Singaporean
diplomat at the APEC summit of that
year. What did you see and why did it
matter?
Well, this uh was the first meeting ever
between the new president of the United
States then, Bill Clinton,
and the leader of China, Jiang Zemin.
And you may recall that in the 1992
election,
Bill Clinton famously stood out from
George H. W. Bush by saying, "Unlike
President Bush, I will not coddle the
butchers of Beijing."
So, [snorts] there was a lot of tension
in the air wondering whether or not Bill
Clinton would launch an attack on
President Jiang Zemin.
And indeed, President Jiang Zemin
himself was a bit nervous because when
he read out his own speech, he read it
so fast
that the Taiwanese delegate said to him,
"Slow down. The interpreters cannot
follow you."
So, there was a lot of nervousness in
the air.
And amidst all this nervousness, when we
had a short break
for coffee,
the first person President Bill Clinton
approached was President Chun Doo-hwan.
And I saw with my own eyes Bill Clinton
coddling Chun Doo-hwan.
>> [laughter]
>> In a way that he said that he would
never do.
Because I So, it was quite a remarkable
and everyone in the room noticed it.
>> was watching with incredible sort of
relief and happiness
that what could have been a painful
confrontational meeting
turned out to be a really remarkable
breakthrough in US-China relations. And
the butcher of Beijing reference was one
to Tiananmen Square a few a few years
before.
Exactly. The he was referring to what
happened in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
And what did that moment, which you
witnessed, then lead to? What did it
unlock in the years ahead?
Well, I think it it enabled the
re-normalization
uh of US-China relations because as you
know, Tiananmen set uh the US-China
relationship back uh quite badly. And as
you know, before then, of course, during
the Cold War
because the United States needed
China
as a [snorts] counterweight against the
Soviet Union
the United States would always bent over
backwards
uh to accommodate China. And I can tell
you an even more
horrifying story.
In 19 uh 81
there was something called the
International Conference on Cambodia
where there was a disagreement between
China and the ASEAN countries
about whether or not the government of
Pol Pot should be allowed to go back to
Phnom Penh after the Vietnamese troops
left Cambodia.
>> [snorts]
>> And uh China took the correct position
under international law, which is that
when a foreign invader leaves,
Pol Pot comes back.
But ASEAN countries said, "No, this
cannot happen because no country will
accept the return of Pol Pot."
>> [snorts]
>> And fortunately, the United States
intervened.
So, we thought the United States would
of course side the ASEAN countries who
were calling for free elections.
Instead, to our absolute horror,
the United States said, "Don't Don't
stand up to China. We need China for uh
our
standing up to Soviet Union." So, that
was one of the most amazing things I saw
in my life, but that showed you how far
we had come between 1981 where China was
being accommodated all the time
to the end of the Cold War, and then
China was suddenly uh an irrelevant
partner then. But while saying that
neither country should be treating it as
the contest that they are, I think
overall you're much more critical of US
policy towards China than the other way
around, aren't you? I read that you said
that
this what's happening now is like the
Cold War, only America now is behaving
as the Soviet Union was during the Cold
War. That when the Soviet Union behaved
unilaterally, ignored international
opinion, and that was the time when
America acted multilaterally and
marshaled global opinion to its side.
It's a very unflattering comparison.
Uh well, that comparison has been made
um
by other scholars, too, that in the
contest between United States and Soviet
Union,
American society was flourishing,
but Soviet society wasn't flourishing.
But today, in the contest between United
States and China, the bottom 50% of the
American population
hasn't haven't they haven't seen their
standard of living improve in several
decades.
And [snorts] indeed, as you know, the
indicators of people at the bottom
are very bad in the United States. And
therefore,
the logical thing for United States to
do
is to first focus on uplifting its
people
rather than to try to engage in a
zero-sum uh geopolitical contest with
the uh with China. But I can tell you in
geopolitics, unfortunately,
common sense doesn't work.
Because this desire to be number one
is so somehow that deeply ingrained into
the human brain,
that's very hard to persuade the policy
makers, "Hey, step back and think what
is a better approach to take?" And I the
goal of my writings is not to say that
China should win or United States should
win.
The goal of my writings is to say that
China and US should step back
and reflect whether it is in their
larger long-term interests to engage in
such a zero-sum contest. And the
standard of living of the Chinese
population has risen immeasurably in
recent decades. There are, of course,
though, rights that they do not enjoy
compared to Americans. Freedom of
expression, the right to choose their
own leaders.
Mhm.
Well, you're right. I mean, China has
rescued 800 million people out of
poverty.
That's, you know,
two and a half to three times the
population
of United States.
And that's an amazing achievement. But
you're right, the Chinese don't enjoy
many of the rights that Americans enjoy.
But Chinese society
has got its own political DNA,
which has been embedded in the Chinese
society only for 3,000 years.
And [snorts] over 3,000 years, the big
lesson that the Chinese people have
learned
is [snorts] that there when there's
chaos in the center, in the capital,
the people suffer.
But when there's political stability and
control in the center, the people
prosper and flourish.
>> [snorts]
>> And when people say that the Chinese
people are not free,
I ask a very simple question. If the
Chinese people are not free,
why is it over 130
million Chinese people
leave China each year,
and then, amazingly,
using their own two feet, return to
China every year?
Now, if they if China was this harsh
dark communist gulag
that is portrayed in the Anglo-Saxon
media, the Chinese people are
irrational. They shouldn't be returning
to China.
But the Chinese who are returning to
China
are the ones who have experienced life
overseas. So, China, to put it simply,
is a different civilization
from Western civilization.
So, the kinds of society that the
Chinese people want at the end of the
day
will be different from Western society.
And and that's something that we got to
learn to live with in the new
multi-civilizational world. I hear what
you're saying, and I'm also, at the same
time, thinking of the evidence that
emerged a few years ago about those
re-education camps in Western China, in
Xinjiang province, where Chinese Muslims
were detained, some as young as in their
teens right up to people in their 70s,
because the state felt they needed
re-educating about their beliefs.
Well, [snorts] there's no question that
China's internal arrangements are not
the same as those of
Western society.
But, you know, when the West raises
concerns about the Muslims in China,
the one comment that the rest of the
world makes is that, in general,
the West doesn't like Muslims.
In general, the West doesn't like
Chinese.
But, for some strange reason, they love
Chinese Muslims.
And it's because it's a political tool
to be used to embarrass China.
Unfortunately, that political tool no
longer works because the whole world is
saying,
"If you in the West are so concerned
about the conditions of Muslims who are
oppressed,
what [snorts] have you said about Gaza?
What have you done about Gaza?" You have
seen
international relations through your
work as a Singaporean diplomat over many
years. But, I want to ask you about your
life story, too, because I think you
have lived history in a really
interesting way in that you came of age
in Singapore just at the moment as it
was getting its independence from
Malaysia after British colonial rule had
come to an end. And when I read your
book, Living the Asian Century, I was
really struck by the hardship that your
that your family experienced and that
you experienced that when you started
school in 1954,
you were seriously underweight and you
had to be put on a special feeding
program in school.
Well,
you know, looking back now, this is a
strange thing to say.
>> [laughter]
>> I feel that it was almost a privilege
to have grown up in a poor third world
society. And you're right, I was put in
a special feeding program at the age of
six because I was technically
undernourished, and I lived in a house
with no flush toilet until I was 13
years old.
And frankly, I found that the the one of
the biggest changes in my life was when
the flush toilet appeared
cuz [snorts] I felt that my sense of
dignity improved dramatically. Mhm. And
also, maybe my my family was very poor,
my father went to jail, the debt
collectors came to our house to try and
auction off the furniture in our house.
So, I went through a very rough
third world childhood. My mother was the
one who took the brunt
of all this pain and difficulties,
and not once did she crack.
And every time in my life I go through a
difficult patch, and when I feel
depressed,
I just think of my mother and I say, "My
mother never cracked
under much greater pressure. How can I
ever crack?" Yeah. So, that resilience
uh
that my mother gave me was an amazing
gift in my life. She had had a narrow
escape from communal violence in what is
now Pakistan at the independence of
India 1947.
Your father had obviously had a very
difficult early life sent from
what was then British India to Singapore
and starting to work manual labor at the
age of 13.
Mhm.
Yes, my both my parents, none of them
ever went to university or not even to
high school or even secondary school, by
the way.
Uh and my father, unfortunately, was
orphaned at a very young age and at the
age of 13 was sent to the British colony
in Singapore
and ended up, quite naturally, without
adult supervision, engaged in several
bad habits like smoking and drinking and
gambling.
And so, my mother, who had an arranged
marriage, had no idea
that she was marrying an alcoholic
gambler.
And that, of course, was the root of our
problems. And my mother, too, as you
said, had a close shave
because she was in a train leaving uh
Pakistan in uh in the middle of the
night in the desert when her last
compartment got decoupled.
And if a mob had come along, then she
would have been killed. Yeah. But she
survived.
So, I guess our family has had lots of
close shaves. Yeah. But, as you say, in
Singapore, too, when you were growing
up, it was a poor neighborhood. Few of
your peers even finished school, let
alone went to university. And that
description in your book of living
without a toilet, it's so striking
compared to what Singapore is today,
that each morning the night soil men
went around the neighborhood. They
opened a small door in the wall of every
house, pulled out a metal can filled
with 24 hours worth of feces and urine
from the occupants of the house. The
sights and smells of that experience
never go away.
And but it's what's amazing
is that Singapore's per capita income at
independence was around $500, the same
as Ghana in West Africa.
But today, Singapore's per capita income
is $94,000,
among the highest in the world.
And no country in the world
has gone
uh from $500 per capita to $94,000 per
capita
in 60 years or less than one human
lifetime.
Now, that's one of the most remarkable
stories of human history.
And again, that's been one of my great
privileges
to travel this remarkable journey
upwards with my fellow Singaporeans.
>> It didn't feel that way in 1965, did it?
I think you were 17, still in school.
Singapore left the Federation it was in
with Malaysia, and there's a sense of
despondency everywhere about how it can
possibly survive on its own. Well, I
remember the day vividly, August 9,
1965,
when Singapore was expelled from the
Malaysian Federation.
And no one in Singapore celebrated
uh our independence because we thought
Singapore was doomed. And there was a
simple reason why Singapore was a doomed
because Singapore was a city,
and when a city is cut off from its
hinterland, which Malaysia was the
hinterland for Singapore,
it can die. It's like taking a heart out
of a body
and expecting the heart to survive
without the supply of blood
and and other, you know,
um
materials to the heart. So, it was a
very difficult time, and no one expected
Singapore
to succeed in the way they that it did,
but of course, their success was due to
two three remarkable
geopolitical geniuses,
uh Lee Kuan Yew, Goh Keng Swee, and S.
Rajaratnam.
And I had the one of the greatest
privileges in my life is that I got to
work with all three of them.
And they were probably the three best
tutors I ever had in my life.
Not just in diplomacy?
Broader than that?
Uh much, much broader. I mean, they were
they were big deep thinkers.
And all three of them could took a
long-range view of history. So, the
reason why Singapore was economically
successful, of course, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew
played a very important role,
but the economic architect of
Singapore's miracle
uh was Dr. Goh Keng Swee.
And when I sat with him, he would tell
me about how the Japanese succeeded,
what happened in the Meiji Reformation,
the lessons the Japanese learned from
the rest of the world, and how Singapore
must try to emulate Japan,
and and therefore succeed. So, I mean,
he he is understanding of history was
amazing. You know, I interviewed Lee
Kuan Yew once. I was really early in my
career. I was in Singapore, and the BBC
sent me to interview him. And he was
perfectly civil, but
I think he probably felt quite insulted
that someone so junior had been sent to
talk to him, the senior minister and
founding father of Singapore.
But Mr. Lee Kuan Yew was acutely aware
that you were with BBC,
and he he knew that by talking to you
that he would get his views and opinions
to a very large section of the human
population, and so he would have been
happy to talk to you.
Tell me then, in the
in this picture that you've painted of
rising China, a rise that can't be
stopped,
it is a country that
in its own way has these moments where
it destabilizes neighbors. Um for
example,
closing airspace around South Korea's
borders, as has been the case recently.
Um
doing things that upset or worry the
Philippines or Taiwan, of course, Japan
at times. How How do these states in the
region, including Singapore, fare in
that Asian order?
Well, I I think we have to understand
that China's rise has been remarkable
and dramatic. And to to explain how
dramatic it is, just imagine when you
when you and I began this conversation
few minutes ago,
there was a cat sitting next to me.
And suddenly after 15 minutes or 20
minutes, I turned around and I noticed
the cat has become a tiger.
Now, I was very comfortable living
sitting next to a cat.
I'm very uncomfortable sitting next to a
tiger.
Now, China has become a tiger.
You have to accept that it is now the
second most powerful country in the
world and still rising
strongly.
And so we have to learn to live with a
much stronger power in our neighborhood.
And the the and the idea that any power
can be benevolent, the term benevolent
great power is an oxymoron.
All great powers will protect their
interests. So, the the the the neighbors
of China therefore
have to adjust to Chinese power, but
this doesn't mean you kowtow to Chinese
power.
But you learn to manage it.
And you know, I can tell you that the
neighbors of China
also have long histories. And to give
you an example, the last country with
whom China had a major war was Vietnam.
And in 1979, about a million soldiers
were fighting each other in that war.
>> [snorts]
>> And
the Vietnamese have, you know, were
occupied by China for for 1,000 years.
Right? But the Vietnamese have an
expression,
a very important expression. They say
that to become a leader of Vietnam,
you must be able to stand up to China.
And you must be able to get along with
China.
And if you cannot do both, you cannot be
a leader of Vietnam.
So, countries in this region, therefore,
are pragmatically adjusting to the
emergence of China.
But I can tell you in our private
conversations,
we do tell the Chinese quite frankly
what our concerns are,
and they do listen to the concerns.
But the important thing is that remember
that we are in Asia.
In Asia, you must always save the face
of the person you're talking to.
Please don't insult China publicly in
the way that European leaders do, in the
way that American leaders do,
cuz that's not how you get to work with
China. Well, I mean, many countries,
many leaders are learning that that's
also the way you work with President
Trump.
Well, I think um
uh President Trump is definitely uh
different uh
uh from his uh predecessors.
But I I also have to emphasize
that
all American presidents
put American interests first
over the interests of other countries.
That's just a fact of life. And for
example, when I was in the UN
in uh 2003,
so many countries advised President
George W. Bush
not to go to war in Iraq. So many
countries, including some of the best
friends of United States,
including France, including Germany,
including Egypt, including Saudi Arabia.
And you know, United States didn't
listen. So, it is it is not the case
that [snorts] you had American
presidents
in the past who would sacrifice American
interests. No, they won't.
And this is a reality when dealing with
great powers. So, what do you think are
the implications of these weeks of war
with Iran? What
do you think is the effect of this on
China? And
is is there a reshaping that is taking
place or is now going to take place
because of the war with Iran?
Well, I've said this to my American
friends
several times and it's it's also a theme
of my book has China won.
Every war that the United States fights,
especially in the Middle East, is a gift
to China.
So, in the 10 years when the United
States was bogged in Iraq
after the illegal invasion of Iraq by
President George W. Bush,
China had its fastest growing years.
It was left to grow peacefully from 2003
to 2013.
Uh so, in the same way,
if the United States gets bogged down in
another war in Iran,
again, it buys time for China.
And this is the difference between
Chinese leaders
and American leaders
is that Chinese leaders, as Henry
Kissinger told me,
always work out a comprehensive
long-term strategy
before embarking on a venture.
And the Chinese do have a comprehensive
long-term strategy for managing the
challenge that United States is posing
to China.
By contrast, the leaders of the United
States, and I don't mean Republicans
only, by the way, is both Democrats and
Republicans have not work out an equally
comprehensive long-term strategy
for managing the return of China as a
great power.
And I try to be helpful by both to both
sides by saying, "Why don't you stick
take a step back
and understand the other side?" Because
as Sun Tzu said, the Chinese strategist,
"Know thyself, know thine enemy, fight a
thousand battles, win a thousand
battles."
But Chinese leaders can act that way
because they don't have to ever deal
with an election.
>> [snorts]
>> That's true, but in the Cold War,
a democratic United States
that had elections every four years
defeated the authoritarian Soviet Union.
So, the constant elections in America
were not were in no way a handicap. In
fact, as the the architect of the
success of the United States in the Cold
War was a man called George Kennan, whom
I met once.
And George Kennan said way back in 1949
that the outcome of the Cold War will be
determined not by the number of bullets
or warships or aircraft carriers or jet
fighters you have.
It'll depend [snorts] at the end of the
day which society creates a spiritual
vitality
that leads to its people flourishing and
growing.
So, if George Kennan were alive today,
he would advise the United States,
"Don't try to get more aircraft
carriers. Try to focus on improving the
livelihood of the bottom 50% of American
people. And if you succeed in doing
that, that's how you win the long-term
contest against China."
Professor Kishore Mahbubani, thank you
so much.
My pleasure. Thank you for having me.